.TH I8KCTL 1 2022-05-22 "Armin Wolf" Documentation

.SH NAME
i8kctl \- Utility for fan control on Dell notebooks

.SH SYNOPSIS
.B i8kctl
.br
.B i8kctl -s [
.I type
.B ] -n [
.I number
.B ] [
.I state
.B ]

.SH DESCRIPTION
.B i8kctl
is a utility to retrieve sensor information on supported Dell notebooks,
where it depends on the dell-smm-hwmon kernel module for hardware access.
.LP
When invoked without arguments it lists all available sensors and
their values.
.LP
When both options '-s' and '-n' specify a valid sensor, its reading is displayed
or its value is set to 'state' if specified.

.SH OPTIONS
.IP "-s, --sensor-type"
Specify type of sensor to read/write.
Can be 'fan', 'tacho' or 'temp'.

.IP "-n, --sensor-number"
Specify number of sensor to read/write.
Must be creater or equal than 1.

.IP "-v, --verbose"
Display verbose information, used e.g. for debugging.

.IP "-?, --help"
Display help list.

.IP "-V, --version"
Display program version.

.SH VERSION
.B i8kctl
needs at least linux kernel 3.0 to display "tacho" and "temp" sensors
and at least linux kernel 5.19 or CONFIG_I8K enabled to display "fan" sensors.

.SH NOTES
.B i8kctl
depends on the precense of the dell_smm_hwmon kernel module. If the module
is missing, all attemps to read/write sensors will fail. If the module is not
automatically loaded on your machine, then you can load it with:
.LP
.in +4n
.EX
modprobe dell_smm_hwmon ignore_dmi=1
.EE
.in
.LP
Writing sensors requires root privileges.

.SH BUGS
Invoking i8kctl on certain machines can cause significant delays which might
cause audio or input glitches. This is usually a hardware problem which can only
be fixed through a BIOS update.
.LP
Notify the maintainers of the dell_smm_hwmon kernel module if you are affected
so your model can be put on a blacklist.

.SH EXAMPLE
To set the fan state of the first fan  to '1', execute:
.LP
.in +4n
.EX
i8kctl -s fan -n 1 1
.EE
.in

.SH AUTHORS
.LP
2022 Armin Wolf <W_Armin@gmx.de>
.br
2013-2017 Vitor Augusto <vitorafsr@gmail.com>
.br
2001-2009 Massimo Dal Zotto <dz@debian.org>

.SH COPYRIGHT
i8kctl is part of the i8kutils package. All files are distributed under the GNU
General Public License (GPL).

.SH SEE ALSO
i8kmon(1), modprobe(8)
