.TH I8KMON 1 "15 Aug 2022" "Vitor Augusto" Utilities
.SH "NAME"
i8kmon \- temperature monitor
.SH "SYNOPSIS"
i8kmon [\fI<options>\fP]
.SH "DESCRIPTION"
The i8kmon is a daemon that monitors the cpu temperature, and control the
fan speed on some Dell laptops. It does that by means of regularly reading the
system temperature, and choosing appropriate speed of the fans.
.LP
The change in the speed depends on a table of threshold. Inside i8kmon the
default table of thresholds is as below
.LP
    set config(0) {{0 0}  -1  60  -1  65}
    set config(1) {{1 0}  50  70  55  75}
    set config(2) {{1 1}  60  80  65  85}
    set config(3) {{2 2}  70 128  75 128}
.LP
This table can be customized at '/etc/i8kmon.conf', which will be read everytime
i8kmon service starts.
.LP
If the program 'acpi' is not installed or returns an error when executed,
i8kmon will assume that the machine is running on AC power.
.LP
On Debian and derivated OSes, i8kmon starts in the background by default as a service.
.SH "OPTIONS"
.LP
i8kmon accepts the following command\-line options when initiated by the user,
not as a service:
.TP
\fB\-t\fR <\fIseconds\fP>
Specifies the interval at which the daemon checks the
hardware status. Useful values are in the range of 1\-5
seconds. Default is 2 seconds.
.TP
\fB\-o\fR
Only update fan speed when thresholds where exceeded.
.TP
\fB\-v\fR
Report hardware status and program actions on stdout.
.TP
\fB\-?\fR, \fB\-help\fR
DIsplay usage information.
.SH "CONFIGURATION"
.LP
As said before, i8kmon has builtin default values of temperature thresholds. If
necessary, they can be changed inside the configuration file /etc/i8kmon.conf.
It is also possible to specify the values of other variables
that change i8kmon behavior.
.LP
The variables and values are as follows:
.TP
\fBset config(verbose)\fR 0
Print verbose logs, disabled by default.
.TP
\fBset config(ondemand)\fR 0
Only update fan speed when thresholds where exceeded.
Useful when updating the fan speed takes too much time
and causes stutter and lags.
Since some machines need periodic fan speed updates,
this option is disabled by default.
.TP
\fBset config(timeout)\fR 2
Timeout, default is 2.
.TP
\fBset config(num_configs)\fR 5
Number of temperature threshold configurations or 'states'.
.LP
.LP
The daemon controls the fans based on 'states' which are defined by
temperature thresholds which cause the fans to switch to a higher or lower state.
Each state has an array of associated fan speeds which are applied when
the state is active.
Each state can have different thresholds for operation on ac power or on battery.
For example the following configuration:
.IP
set config(num_configs) 4
.br
set config(0) {{0 0}  \-1  60  \-1  65}
.br
set config(1) {{1 0}  50  70  55  75}
.br
set config(2) {{1 1}  60  80  65  85}
.br
set config(3) {{2 2}  70 128  75 128}
.LP
defines state 0 with both fans off, high threshold of 60 degrees (65 on
battery) and low threshold \-1 degrees, which is actually never reached since 0 is the
lowest temperature. When the high temperature threshold is reached the program switches to state
1 (left low, right off) which has a high threshold of 70 degrees and a low
threshold of 50 degrees. If on ac power the temperature drops to 50 or below the program will
switch back to state 0, if it rises to 70 or above it will enter state 2, and so on.
For better operation the temperature ranges should be overlapping with an
hysteresis of at least 10 degrees, i.e. 1={50 70},2={60 80} is better than
1={50 70},2={70 80}.
.LP
If the laptop support an additional fan, then the speed values for this fan must be
placed at the start of the fan speed array like this:
.IP
set config(2) {{<value> 1 1} 60 80 65 85}
.LP
If the laptop has only one fan, it is better to specify a '-' instead of the fan
speed of the missing fan. For example:
.IP
set config(2) {{1 -}  60  80  65  85}
.SH "FILES"
.LP
\fI/etc/i8kmon.conf\fP
.SH "AUTHORS"
.LP
Armin Wolf <W_Armin@gmx.de>
.br
Vitor Augusto <vitorafsr@gmail.com>
.br
Massimo Dal Zotto <dz@debian.org>
.SH "COPYRIGHT"
.LP
i8kmon and all the i8kutils programs, scripts and other files are
distributed under the GNU General Public License (GPL).
On Debian GNU/Linux systems, the complete text of the GNU General
Public License can be found in `/usr/share/common-licenses/GPL'.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.LP
i8kctl(1)
